.. _theory-md:

==========================
Molecular Dynamics: Theory
==========================

.. _th_md_nve:

Microcanonical (NVE) ensemble
-----------------------------

The Hamiltonian for the microcanonical ensemble is,

.. math::
  \mathcal{H} = \sum_{i=1}^N \frac{\mathbf{p}_i^2}{2m_i} + U(\mathbf{r}_i)

where :math:`\mathbf{p}_i` and :math:`\mathbf{r}_i` are the position and
momentum of particle :math:`i` and :math:`U` is the DFT total (potential)
energy. Hamilton's equations can be solved to give the following equations of
motion:

.. math::
  \mathbf{\dot{r}}_i &= \frac{\mathbf{p}_i}{m_i} \\
  \mathbf{\dot{p}}_i &= \frac{\partial U(\mathbf{r}_i)}{\partial\mathbf{r}_i} = \mathbf{F_i}

In order to construct a time-reversible algorithm from these equations, the
Liouvillian formulation is employed :cite:`t-Frenkel2002` (trivially, in this
case). The Liouville operator :math:`L` can be defined in terms of position and
momentum components:

.. math::
  iL = \mathbf{\dot{r}}\frac{\partial}{\partial\mathbf{r}} + \mathbf{\dot{p}}\frac{\partial}{\partial\mathbf{p}} = i(L_r + L_p).

The Liouvillian can be used to construct the classical propagator, which relates
the state :math:`f` of the system at time 0 to its state at time :math:`t`:

.. math::
  f[\mathbf{p}^N(t),\mathbf{r}^N(t)] = e^{iLt}f[\mathbf{p}^N(0),\mathbf{r}^N(0)]

Taking the individual position and momentum parts of the Liouvillian :math:`L_r`
and :math:`L_p`, it can be shown that applying it to the state :math:`f` result
in a simple linear shift in coordinates and a simple linear shift in momentum
respectively:

.. math::
  iL_rf(t) &= f[\mathbf{p}^N(0),\mathbf{r}^N(0) + \mathbf{\dot{r}}^N(0)t] \\ 
  iL_pf(t) &= f[\mathbf{p}^N(0) + \mathbf{F}^N(0)t,\mathbf{r}^N(0)]

However, we cannot simply replace :math:`e^{iLt}` with :math:`e^{iL_rt}` because
:math:`iL_r` and :math:`iL_p` are non-commuting operators, so we must employ the
Trotter-Suzuki identity:

.. math::
  e^{A+B} = \lim_{P\rightarrow\infty}\left(e^{A/2P}e^{B/P}e^{A/2P}\right)^P

Thus for a small enough time step :math:`\Delta t = t/P` and to first order, a
discrete time step corresponds to the application of the discrete time
propagator :math:`G`,

.. math::
  G(\Delta t) = U_1\left(\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right)U_2\left(\Delta t\right)U_1\left(\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right) = e^{iL_1\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_2\Delta t}e^{iL_1\frac{\Delta t}{2}},

which can be shown to be unitary and therefore time-reversible. Applying the
operators :math:`U` in the sequence determined by the Trotter decomposition
generates the velocity Verlet algorithm, which is used to integrate
microcanonical molecular dynamics in CONQUEST. For a detailed derivation of the
algorithm, refer to Frenkel & Smit :cite:`t-Frenkel2002`.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_xlbomd:

Extended Lagrangian Born-Oppenheimer MD (XL-BOMD)
-------------------------------------------------

If the electronic density from the previous ionic step is used as an initila
guess for the next SCF cycle, a problem arises because this process breaks the
time-reversibility of the dynamics. This is manifested as a gradual drift in the
total energy in the case of a NVE simulation, or the conserved quantity in the
case of non-Hamiltonian dynamics. The solution proposed by Niklasson
:cite:`t-Niklasson2008,t-Niklasson2014` is to introduce auxilliary electronic
degrees of freedom into the Lagrangian, which can be propagated via
time-reversible integrators.

The extended Lagrangian used in CONQUEST is :cite:`t-Arita2014`,

.. math::
  \mathcal{L}^\mathrm{XBO}\left(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{\dot{X}}, \mathbf{R}, \mathbf{\dot{R}}\right) = \mathcal{L}^\mathrm{BO}\left(\mathbf{R}, \mathbf{\dot{R}}\right) + \frac{1}{2}\mu\mathrm{Tr}\left[\mathbf{\dot{X}}^2\right] - \frac{1}{2}\mu\omega^2\mathrm{Tr}\left[(\mathbf{LS} - \mathbf{X})^2\right],

where :math:`\mathbf{X}` is a sparse matrix with the same range as
:math:`\mathbf{LS}`, :math:`\mu` is the fictitious electron mass and
:math:`\omega` is the curvature of the auxiliary harmonic potential. The
Euler-Lagrange equations of motion are then,

.. math::
  m_i\mathbf{\ddot{r}_i} &= -\frac{\partial U[{{\mathbf{R;LS}}}]}{\partial\mathbf{r}_i} = \mathbf{F_i} \\
  \mathbf{\ddot{X}} &= \omega^2(\mathbf{LS} - \mathbf{X}),

The first of these is simply Newton's second law, and the velocity update
equation of motion in the microcanonical ensemble. The second can be integrated
using a time-reversible algorithm, the velocity Verlet scheme in the case of
CONQUEST :cite:`t-Arita2014`:

.. math::
  \mathbf{X}(t+\delta t) &= 2\mathbf{X}(t) -\mathbf{X}(t-\delta t) + \delta t^2\omega^2\left[\mathbf{L}(t)\mathbf{S}(t)-\mathbf{X}(t)\right] \\
  &+ a\sum_{m=0}^M c_m\mathbf{X}(t-m\delta t)

i.e. the trajectory of :math:`\mathbf{X}(t)` is time-reversible, and evolves in
a harmonic potential centred on the ground state density
:math:`\mathbf{L}(t)\mathbf{S}(t)`. The matrix :math:`\mathbf{XS}^{-1}` is a
good guess for the :math:`\mathbf{L}` matrix in the Order(N) scheme.

Despite the time-reversitibility, the :math:`\mathbf{X}` matrix tends in
practice to gradually drift from the harmonic centre over time, increasing the
number of SCF iterations required to reach the minimum over the course of the
simulation. To remove such numerical errors, the final dissipative term is
included, and is found to have a minimal effect on the time-reversibility. We
note that since the auxiliary variable :math:`X` is used to generate an intial
guess for the SCF process, it does not appear in the conserved
(pseudo-Hamiltonian) quantity for the dynamics.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_nonH:

Non-Hamiltonian dynamics
------------------------

.. _th_md_ext:

Extended system method
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Hamiltonian dynamics generally describes systems that are isolated from their
surroundings, but in the canonical and isobaric-isothermal ensembles, we need to
couple the system to an external heat bath and/or stress. It is possible to
model such systems by positing a set of equations of *non-Hamiltonian* equations
of motion, and proving that they generate the correct statistical ensemble
:cite:`t-Tuckerman2010`. This is the extended system approach: we modify the
Hamiltonian to include the thermostat and/or barostat degrees of freedom, derive
the (pseudo-) Hamiltonian equations of motion, and demostrate that the correct
phase space distribution for the ensemble is recovered.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_nvt:

Canonical (NVT) ensemble
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the Nose-Hoover formulation :cite:`t-Nose1984,t-Hoover1985`, the Hamiltonian
for a system in the canonical ensemble can be written,

.. math::
  \mathcal{H} = \sum_i \frac{1}{2}m_i s^2\mathbf{\dot{r}}_i^2 + U(\mathbf{r}_i) + \frac{1}{2}Q\dot{s}^2 - (n_f + 1)k_B T \ln s,

where :math:`\mathbf{r}_i` and :math:`\mathbf{\dot{r}_i}` are respectively the
position and velocity of particle :math:`i`, :math:`U` is the potential energy,
in this case the DFT total energy, :math:`s` is a dimensionless quantity that
can be interpreted post-hoc as a time step scaling factor, :math:`Q` is the
fictitious mass of the heat bath and :math:`n_f` is the number of ionic degrees
of freedom. Hamilton's equations can be solved to generate the Nose-Hoover
equations of motion. However Martyna *et al*. demonstrate that this method does
not generate an ergodic trajectory, and proposed an alternative formulation
:cite:`t-Martyna1992` in which the temperature is controlled by a chain of
:math:`M` coupled thermostats of mass :math:`Q_k`, notional position
:math:`\eta_k` and conjugate momentum :math:`p_{\eta_k}`:

.. math::
  \mathbf{\dot{r}_i} &= \frac{\mathbf{p}_i}{m_i} \\
  \mathbf{\dot{p}_i} &= -\frac{\partial U(\mathbf{r})}{\partial \mathbf{r}_i} - \frac{p_{\eta_1}}{Q_1}\mathbf{p}_i \\
  \dot{\eta}_k &= \frac{p_{\eta_k}}{Q_k} \\
  \dot{p}_{\eta_1} &= \left(\sum_{i=1}^N\frac{\mathbf{p}_i}{m_i} - n_fk_BT\right) - \frac{p_{\eta_{2}}}{Q_{\eta_{2}}}p_{\eta_1} \\
  \dot{p}_{\eta_k} &= \left(\frac{p^2_{\eta_{k-1}}}{Q_{k-1}} - k_BT\right) - \frac{p_{\eta_{k+1}}}{Q_{k+1}}p_{\eta_k} \\
  \dot{p}_{\eta_M} &= \left(\frac{p^2_{\eta_{M-1}}}{Q_{M-1}} - k_BT\right)

The Liouvillian for these equations of motion can be non-uniquely decomposed
into components of ionic position (:math:`iL_r`) and momentum (:math:`iL_p`) as
in the microcanonical case, the extended Lagrangian (:math:`iL_\mathrm{XL}`, and
a Nose-Hoover chain component (:math:`iL_\mathrm{NHC}`)

.. math::
  iL = iL_\mathrm{NHC} + iL_p + iL_{\mathrm{XL}} + iL_r,

which is directly translated into an algorithm with the Trotter-Suzuki
expansion,

.. math::
  \exp(iL\Delta t) = &\exp\left(iL_\mathrm{NHC}\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right)\exp\left(iL_p\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right) \times \\
  &\exp\left(iL_\mathrm{XL}\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right)\exp\left(iL_r\Delta t\right)\exp\left(iL_\mathrm{XL}\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right) \times \\
  &\exp\left(iL_p\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right)\exp\left(iL_\mathrm{NHC}\frac{\Delta t}{2}\right)

This is recognisable as the velocity Verlet algorithm with extended Lagrangian
integration which can be reduced to a single step, as described in
:ref:`Extended Lagrangian Born-Oppenheimer MD (XL-BOMD)`, with a half time step
integration of the Nose-Hoover chain equations of motion before and after. For
full details of the integration scheme, see Hirakawa *et al*.
:cite:`t-Hirakawa2017`.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_npt:

Isobaric-Isothermal (NPT) ensemble
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Parinello-Rahman equations of motion :cite:`t-Parrinello1981` extend the
fixed cell equations of motion to include the cell degrees of freedom in the
extended system approach. We use the Martyna-Tobias-Tuckerman-Klein modification
:cite:`t-Martyna1996`, which couples the variable cell equations of motion to a
Nose-Hoover chain the themrostat the system, recovering the isobaric-isothermal
(NPT) ensemble. For an unconstrained cell (i.e. the lattice vectors can change
freely), the equations of motion are,

.. math::
  \mathbf{\dot{r}}_i &= \frac{\mathbf{p}_i}{m_i} + \frac{\mathbf{p}_g}{W_g}\mathbf{r}_i \\
  \mathbf{\dot{p}}_i &= \mathbf{F}_i - \frac{\mathbf{p}_g}{W_g}\mathbf{p}_i - \left(\frac{1}{N_f}\right)\frac{\mathrm{Tr}[\mathbf{p}_g]}{W_g}\mathbf{p}_i - \frac{p_\xi}{Q}\mathbf{p}_i \\
  \mathbf{\dot{h}} &= \frac{\mathbf{p}_g\mathbf{h}}{W_g} \\
  \mathbf{\dot{p}_g} &= V(\mathbf{P}_\mathrm{int}-\mathbf{I}P_\mathrm{ext}) + \left[\frac{1}{N_f}\sum_{i=1}^N\frac{\mathbf{p}_i^2}{m_i}\right]\mathbf{I} - \frac{p_\xi}{Q}\mathbf{p}_g \\
  \dot{\xi} &= \frac{p_\xi}{Q} \\
  \mathbf{\dot{p}}_g &= \sum_{i=1}^N\frac{\mathbf{p}_i^2}{m_i} + \frac{1}{W_g}\mathrm{Tr}[\mathbf{p}_g^T\mathbf{p}_g] - (N_f + d^2)kT
   
Here, :math:`\mathbf{r}_i`, :math:`\mathbf{p}_i` and :math:`m_i` are the
position, momentum and mass of particle :math:`i` respectively, :math:`\xi`,
:math:`p_\xi` and :math:`Q` are the position, momentum and mass of the
thermostat, and :math:`\mathbf{h}`, :math:`\mathbf{p}_g` and :math:`W_g` are the
matrix of lattice vectors, matrix of cell velocities and cell mass respectively.
Note that these equations only include one Nose-Hoover thermostat for
simplicity. Conquest uses the Shinoda-Shiga-Mikami splitting of the Liouvillian
:cite:`t-Shinoda2004` to propagate the system. The Liouvillian is decomposed as,

.. math::
  iL = iL_r + iL_h + iL_v + iL_\mathrm{bath},

which can be further split,

.. math::
  iL_\mathrm{bath} &= iL_\mathrm{box} + iL_\mathrm{particles} \\
  iL_\mathrm{box} &= iL_\mathrm{vbox} + iL_\xi + iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}} \\
  iL_\mathrm{particles} &= iL_\mathrm{vpart} + iL_\xi + iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}}

Using Liouville's theorem, we have,

.. math::
  iL_r &= \sum_{i=1}^N[\mathbf{v}_i + \mathbf{v}_g\mathbf{r}_i]\cdot\nabla_{\mathbf{r}_i} \\
  iL_h &= \sum_{\alpha,\beta}\mathbf{v}_{g,\alpha\beta}\mathbf{h}_{\alpha\beta}\frac{\partial}{\partial\mathbf{h}_{\alpha\beta}} \\
  iL_v &= \sum_{i=1}^N\left(\frac{\mathbf{F}_i}{m_i}\right)\cdot\nabla_{\mathbf{v}_i} \\
  iL_\mathrm{bath} &= iL_\mathrm{vpart} + iL_\mathrm{vbox} + iL_\xi + iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}} \\
  &= \sum_{i=1}^N\left[-\left\{\mathbf{v}_g + \frac{1}{N_f}\mathrm{Tr}(\mathbf{v}_g) + v_{\xi_1}\right\}\mathbf{v}_i\right]\nabla_{\mathbf{v}_i} \\
  &+ \sum_{\alpha,\beta}\left[\frac{F_\mathrm{box}}{W} - v_{\xi_1}\mathbf{v}_{g,\alpha\beta}\right]\frac{\partial}{\partial\mathbf{v}_{g,\alpha\beta}} \\
  &+ \sum_{k=1}^M v_{\xi_k}\frac{\partial}{\partial\xi_k} \\
  &+ \left[\frac{F_{\mathrm{NHC}_1}}{Q_1} - v_{\xi_1}v_{\xi_2}\right]\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_1}} \\
  &+ \sum_{k=2}^M\left[\frac{1}{Q_k}(Q_{k-1}v_{\xi_{k-1}}^2 - kT_\mathrm{ext}) - v_{\xi_k}v_{\xi_{k+1}}\right]\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_k}} \\
  &+ \left[\frac{1}{Q_M}(Q_{M-1}v_{\xi_{M-1}}^2 - kT_\mathrm{ext})\right]\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_M}}

Here we use :math:`M` heat baths in a Nose-Hoover chain. The Trotter-Suzuki
expansion is,

.. math::
  e^{iL\Delta t} = e^{iL_\mathrm{bath}\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_v\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_h\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_r\Delta t}e^{iL_h\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_v\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{iL_\mathrm{bath}\frac{\Delta t}{2}}.

The Liouvillian for the heat baths can be further expanded:

.. math::
  e^{iL_\mathrm{particles}\frac{\Delta t}{2}} = e^{\left(iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{4}}e^{\left(iL_\xi + iL_\mathrm{vpart}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{2}}e^{\left(iL_\xi + iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{4}}

Finally, expanding the first propagator in the previous expression, we have,

.. math::
  e^{\left(iL_{v_{\xi_1}} + iL_{v_{\xi_k}} + iL_{v_{\xi_M}}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{4}} &= e^{-i\left(-v_{\xi_1}v_{\xi_2}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_1} - \sum_{k=2}^Mv_{\xi_k}v_{\xi_{k+1}}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_k} - v_{\xi_{M-1}}v_{\xi_M}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_M}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{8}} \\
  &\times e^{i\left(F_{\mathrm{NHC}_1}\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_1}} + F_{\mathrm{NHC}_k}\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_k}} + F_{\mathrm{NHC}_M}\frac{\partial}{\partial v_{\xi_M}}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{4}} \\
  &\times e^{-i\left(-v_{\xi_1}v_{\xi_2}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_1} - \sum_{k=2}^Mv_{\xi_k}v_{\xi_{k+1}}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_k} - v_{\xi_{M-1}}v_{\xi_M}\frac{\partial}{\partial \xi_M}\right)\frac{\Delta t}{8}}

These expressions are directly translated into the integration algorithm.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_weak:

Weak coupling thermostat/barostat
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Instead of modifying the Hamiltonian, the Berendsen-type weak coupling method
:cite:`t-Berendsen1984` involves coupling the ionic degrees of freedom to a an
external temperature and/or pressure bath via "the principle of least local
perturbation consistent with the required global coupling." Thermostatting is
acheived via a Langevin-type equation of motion, in which the system is globally
coupled to a heat bath and subjected to random noise:

.. math::
    m_i\ddot{\mathbf{r}}_i = \mathbf{F}_i + m_i \gamma\left(\frac{T_0}{T}-1\right)\dot{\mathbf{r}}_i,

where :math:`\gamma` is a global friction constant chosen to be the same for all
particles. This can be acheived in practice by rescaling the velocities
:math:`\mathbf{v}_i \rightarrow \lambda\mathbf{v}_i`, where :math:`\lambda` is,

.. math::
    \lambda = \left[ 1 + \frac{\Delta t}{\tau_T}\left(\frac{T_0}{T}-1\right)\right]^{\frac{1}{2}}

A similar argument can be applied for weak coupling to an external pressure
bath. In the isobaric-isoenthalpic ensemble, the velocity of the particles can
be expressed,

.. math::
    \dot{\mathbf{r}} = \mathbf{v} - \frac{\beta(P_0 - P)}{3\tau_P}\mathbf{r},

i.e. the fractional coordinates are scaled by a factor determined by the
difference between the internal and external pressures, the isothermal
compressibility :math:`\beta` and a pressure coupling time constant $\tau_P$.
In the isotropic case, the cell scaling factor :math:`\mu` can be expressed,

.. math::
    \mu = \left[ 1 - \frac{\Delta t}{\tau_P}(P_0 - P)\right]^{\frac{1}{3}},

where the compressibility is absorbed into the time time constant
:math:`\tau_P`. Allowing for fluctuations of all cell degrees of freedom, the
scaling factor becomes,

.. math::
    \mathbf{\mu} = \mathbf{I} - \frac{\beta\Delta t}{3\tau_P}(\mathbf{P}_0 - \mathbf{P})

While trivial to implement and in general stable, the weak-coupling method does
not recover the correct phase space distribution for the canonical or
isobaric-isothermal ensembles, for which the extended system method is
required.  It is no longer supported in CONQUEST, but the concepts are useful.

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.

.. _th_md_svr:

Stochastic velocity rescaling
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Stochastic velocity rescaling (SVR) :cite:`t-Bussi2007` is a modification of the
weak coupling method, in which a correctly constructed random force is added to
enforce the correct NVT (or NPT) phase space distribution. The kinetic energy is
rescaled such that the change in kinetic energy between thermostatting steps is,

.. math::
  dK = (\bar{K} - K)\frac{dt}{\tau} + 2\sqrt{\frac{K\bar{K}}{N_f}}\frac{dW}{\sqrt{\tau}}

where :math:`\bar{K}` is the target kinetic energy (external temperature),
:math:`dt` is the time step, :math:`\tau` is the time scale of the thermostat,
:math:`N_f` is the number of degrees of freedom and :math:`dW` is a Wiener
process. Practically, the particle velocities are rescaled by a factor of
:math:`\alpha`, defined via,

.. math::
  \alpha^2 = e^{-\Delta t/\tau} + \frac{\bar{K}}{N_fK}\left(1-e^{-\Delta t/\tau}\right)\left(R_1^2 + \sum_{i=2}^{N_f}R_i^2\right) + 2e^{-\Delta t/2\tau}\sqrt{\frac{\bar{K}}{N_fK}\left(1-e^{-\Delta t/\tau}\right)R_1}

Where :math:`R_i` is a set of :math:`N_f` normally distributed random numbers
with unitary variance. This method can be applied to thermostat the NPT ensemble
by barostatting the system with the Parinello-Rahman method, and using the above
expressions, but with additional :math:`R_i`'s for the cell degrees of freedom,
and thermostatting the cell velocities as well as the particle velocities
:cite:`t-Bussi2009`.

.. bibliography:: references.bib
    :cited:
    :labelprefix: Ta
    :keyprefix: t-
    :style: unsrt

Go to :ref:`top <theory-md>`.
